We'd like to welcome Wiley Hodges,
Senior Project Manager of
Developer Products at Apple.
Good afternoon.
Things I deal with at Apple are related
to development and developer products,
and a very critical part of that is Java.
And one of the most important and for me
exciting Java development products that's
available today on Mac OS X is Eclipse.
I'm very pleased to be able to welcome
John Wiegand and Erich Gamma to tell
us more about Eclipse on Mac OS X.
So, with no further ado, thank you.
[Transcript missing]
See, when you leave the room,
we have doubled this number.
OK.
How many of you have a
product shipping on Eclipse?
Good, still.
So I can't promise you double
these at the end of this session,
but it's a good thing to do.
So, what is Eclipse,
is the first question.
This is our famous quote.
We've used this repeatedly
for the last three years.
It's a universal tool platform,
an open extensible IDE for anything,
but nothing in particular.
And this is an important theme.
We have good Java development tools,
but it's much more than that.
So let's look at the
building blocks here.
We start with a runtime.
Very small, less than a megabyte,
knows about the notion of
plug-ins and nothing else.
Built on top of that is a window
toolkit and then a UI library.
So this is our generic
application platform.
Knows nothing about tools even.
This is just the core base.
Can be used for any
application you choose.
So it's laid in two layers.
Now SWT is just vanilla widgets.
And Jface, higher level application
level functionality.
Like if you connect your widgets
to your model behind that.
This kind of stuff is in Jface.
So it's laid in two layers.
Then we add the notion
of tools on top of that.
So we have a project model that we add,
help facilities, an update mechanism,
text infrastructure, compare, search,
debug.
All the specific stuff that
makes it a tool platform.
So all that's layered on top.
Those are optional components.
They can actually get leveraged for
someone who's using it as a general
purpose application platform as well.
And what you see on
top of this IDE stack,
you see now we have basically
a language neutral layer.
We have search, debug, compare, text.
But this infrastructure
is not language specific.
And what you will see now when
you go to the next layer in JDT,
we build on top of those and
add Java specific search,
Java specific compare,
Java specific editing.
Right, that's the model.
So the JDT adds knowledge
of Java to the platform.
But the core platform
doesn't know about Java.
Which means for us as JDT developers,
we get no privileges from the platform.
Which is a healthy thing
because this gives us this fair
play and ensures good APIs.
So we were kind of also the pioneers
of the whole API extension story.
And it was a really healthy experience
to go through this period of frictions,
right?
We want this from the platform.
No, you cannot have it.
So that's how we evolved JDT.
So we're really going to
focus in the JDT area for
the most part this afternoon.
We'll show the breadth,
but JDT is going to be our primary focus
and the platform through JDT perspective.
So we had three primary goals
when we set out to do Eclipse.
The first, called the open platform,
we want to work on a
wide range of platforms.
We're showing Mac, Windows, Linux,
Solaris, the full gamut.
And besides working on those platforms,
we want to be able to leverage the
facilities that those platforms provide.
So it looks like a
Windows app on Windows,
and it looks like and
is a Mac app on the Mac.
Next goal, as Eric already alluded to,
we want to build good
Java development tools,
but that doesn't want to be our center.
Our center is we're a platform,
and we make it possible so you can
build a C development environment,
Java development environment,
web tooling, whatever makes sense.
All this can be built.
So the model is we have something which
knows nothing about different artifacts.
You extend the platform with knowledge
about the particular artifact.
You plug in XML tooling,
you plug in EJB tooling to make the
platform aware of these artifacts.
That's our model.
So then once you put
these tools in place,
we want it to be such that you
don't look at it as a user.
You've got this wide range of tools
that have nothing to do with each other,
but rather you've got a seamless whole.
So the seamless integration
is really important,
both in terms of the
product that you get,
the Eclipse-based product initially,
but also any extensions
that get added later.
It feels like all parts
of a single whole.
So our background,
you see it's not our first
attempt to build an IDE.
If you look at the whole knowledge which
we have in our team on different tools,
you see we have Smalltalk,
we have Taligent Technology,
Visual Edge for Java, TeamV, C++ Tools.
So some of these projects
were more successful,
some of them less successful,
some of them even died.
But I think the key point here,
we really tried to say,
"Eclipse is our last chance
to get things right."
We hope we succeeded, partially.
So we think we've really
leveraged our experience.
And the other thing is
as our community grows,
we've brought many more different areas
of background to play over time as well.
So we're seeing more teams
and our roots are broadening.
So what is Eclipse again?
Look at it from a different perception.
Extensible tools platform.
Out of the box function.
We didn't really talk about this yet,
but we wanted Eclipse when you get it.
You take that initial download,
it's something that's
interesting and it's useful.
So the Java development tools was
a good test case of the platform,
but it's also a useful function.
So if you take that with the plugin
development environment on top of it,
you can build plugins
of your own immediately,
so within minutes.
And one of the things we're going to
show today is how easy that is to do.
So the trick here is, right,
we want to give you a Christmas present,
but we haven't forgotten to
put the batteries in there.
It's not just good technology,
but it's being applied.
So we have Eclipse
Foundation that's been established.
There's on the order of 50
major organizations involved.
They're building real
products based on Eclipse.
That real feedback is very valuable and
puts it to serious product level use.
But not just product level use.
We really care about the
open source community.
And the open source project
is basically our lifeblood.
And that's where we spend our time,
listening and responding
and working together.
And also to make open
source even simpler,
we wanted to really have
first class integration of
open source tools like Ant,
CVS, JUnit, right?
That you can really work in
open source environment in a
seamless and productive manner.
So what is JDT?
Screenshot.
I think the screenshot
is not too interesting.
So what I want to do is,
I will go through some demo.
I must confess,
I don't daily code on the Mac,
so some of my keystrokes might slip.
And I claim my wife is guilty for
that because she's having a Mac,
but she only borrows it to me on
Saturday morning when she goes shopping.
So I've really limited
training experience.
So what I will show, yes, thank you.
So I will show how some code exploration,
and as we go,
I will show you some new stuff.
I will also show you some old stuff.
I hope you can still profit from it.
First of all,
let me start with something.
I guess the example,
one word about the example.
Let's get rid of this guy here.
The example is JHotDraw,
which is a drawing framework
which is based on HotDraw,
which was initially built by
Ward Cunningham and Kent Beck.
And this is basically some
sample code I wrote when I still
thought about design patterns,
right?
Who wants to know about that anymore?
But it's still a good sample.
Let's first start with something
which is really invisible,
but which I think is where we have a
big advantage over many other tools.
It's a feature I don't want to miss,
which I don't see in other platforms,
which is incremental
compilation in the background.
So our compiler technology, maybe John,
you can say something about it
while I try to open something here.
One of the things that we've done from
the beginning with our compiler is we use
our compiler both to do the build engine,
but also all of our tools are
built on top of the same piece.
So we get the same exact
characteristics between the two.
So our recovery mechanisms, et cetera,
all leverage the same pieces.
I feel like this is unfair, Eric.
We need something to make it
a little more challenging.
No, no.
First I want to show
you what our goal was.
Our goal was you change a massive body,
and below one second you
should be able to run again.
So you have to watch fast.
It's done.
Yeah, we need to,
can we run this off battery, Todd?
Just to make it a little bit... So, well,
we have the progress view here.
Let's just drag it so you can
at least see we are building.
Watch quickly, right?
So you want to have
something more advanced?
You want to let it change a comment,
for instance?
So you see incremental building,
highly sophisticated when
you want a quick turnaround.
One thing which is also special,
we come from an explorative environment,
John even more than I do,
and know Smalltalk,
which is a highly optimistic language,
which means what our compiler can do,
which I don't know of any
other one which can do that,
it can generate code even when
you have errors in your source.
If I have one method in error,
for all the other methods in my file,
code gets still generated,
which means I can execute coded errors,
which is just great.
If you have a large piece of
software you want to port,
I want to run it without having
done the big bang approach.
So that's just some inheritage
from our exploration days,
Smalltalk, which was just given.
Debugging is also very important.
So let's do some debugging here.
So I have to run this thing.
Don't be confused about the package name,
it's old code.
So it's CH stands for Switzerland.
Joe Rowe.
We are running the debugger now.
And we debug it as a Java application.
Here we go.
I want to just make it a little bit
more interesting and add some data.
That's the most critical
part of the demo,
since I can easily get lost on the disk.
But it happens to me.
Now John, it's your opportunity to talk.
So again, notice we're using the native
controls as we work through here.
So this shows the native
control integration.
We leverage those pieces as we go.
I save you, John.
So here we go.
This is from the young times
when you had lots of fun.
So it's not only a drawing tool,
it's also an animation.
So now I run it in the debugger.
And you know, usually you use,
You use tool palettes to change colors.
That's a little bit boring,
so we can do better than that.
"I want get attribute,
I think that's not what I want,
I want get fill color.
Can you imagine what I'm up to?
So let's set a break point.
Here we are in the debugger now.
So we look at what is in this fill color.
Let's just get the
expression and inspect it.
So that's something you will
see often in the new release.
Now we work with these
lightweight dialogs,
which means really we don't
want to distract stuff.
So you often work with this code
assist-like style lightweight dialogs.
That's what you see here, right?
This is an inspector,
but it's really lightweight and you
can still have the full functionality.
So you have some color stuff here.
Now we want to be mean.
Let's continue running.
What we will do now-- hello.
Oh, I have to remove the breakpoint.
That will be better.
So guess what I'm up to now?
I don't use the palette
to change the color,
I just change the code.
So instead of restarting the program,
you're just changing it on the block.
What fits Apple style?
And here's Red.
So now what I will do is I will save.
Whoops.
So what happened, right?
I saved in the background,
the code got compiled,
the change code got updated
into the running VM,
and of course I could do
that without any reason.
So the next feature, just to show,
you know,
structure is really important to us.
So I made a change to method that's
also heritage from Smalltalk.
But in Smalltalk,
you could do this fine-grained
history method level.
So I can still do this now.
So I want to go back
to the previous stuff.
But I don't want to code it.
Instead, I want to use local history.
And I say replace with.
And then I get the local history,
but just of this single method.
So on the fly, you know,
we parse out the structure,
things like that.
We replace.
Save.
And we are happy again.
Okay.
So just to reiterate there,
all this is built on top of
the language neutral structure,
right?
So this is JavaScript function
that's layered on top.
So let's look a little
bit at refactoring.
Refactoring is, of course,
I think one of the most productivity
increasing ideas and tools these days.
And I think the different stairways to
heaven when you think about refactoring.
So the first step is now we
can rename a class or a method,
and then things get updated references.
That's the first step.
The next step is you can do
kind of structural manipulations
like extract a method.
Then the third step to me is the
really interesting refactorings
like extract interface.
You have a type,
you extract an interface,
and you change all the code
which could use this interface
to refer to this new interface.
Now this is based on more
interesting algorithms like
we are using type constraints,
which we have published
at UPSLA last year.
And then the fourth level is
where it gets really interesting.
That's where you start not only refactor,
but first of all you can also update
derived resources like Java documents,
or you can allow others to
participate like an updated JSP.
Or you can update derived
stuff like variable names.
I change a class name.
I also want to update variable names
which refer to this class name.
Things like that.
So we are at level three
on the move to level four.
So let me show you something.
Some smell detection.
Let's go ahead and set
some brookmark here.
What's a good one?
Let's just do a reference search
where this election is used.
Where is this guy used?
Without this refactoring support,
people tend to live with
programs that are wrong.
It's just not worth the
effort of fixing them up.
But with this,
you just naturally keep your
programs with better hygiene.
So I see this expression a lot, you know,
with F selection contains.
So that's kind of some code smell.
I want to extract it as a method.
Others can do that too.
Let's call the refactoring menu,
which is context sensitive,
and I want to do extract method.
However, what is interesting here
is this little checkbox.
When I extract this method,
we will go in and find other places in
your code where you used the same code,
the duplication.
And we will refact this as well for you.
This is kind of smell detection.
We not only do what you want,
we also help you detect
other smells in your code,
in this case duplication of this method.
So let's do that,
that you see that I didn't lie to you.
Contains figure.
And let's do the preview here.
Then you see replace
duplicate code fragments.
We go in another place in your
code and we update this as well.
You can imagine you can
go even further with that.
But that's kind of where
I see refactoring is going.
Refactoring in JavaDoc, as I mentioned,
derived data refactoring.
Let's maybe add some JavaDoc thing here.
But I have a parameter.
You didn't really draw much attention,
Erich, to the context sensitivity.
Let me just mention,
you went by that because
we're used to it.
But what happens on the pop-up
is the JDT is finding the
refactorings that are appropriate.
So instead of seeing the long list
of all the possible refactorings,
you're seeing the ones that
make sense in that context.
So again, it's helping you do the
work you need to do.
Behind this is quite a machinery, right?
There is always an abstract syntax tree
you have to have to make these decisions.
So,
I want to show Java doc updating.
For instance, I've added a Java doc tag.
I just go in.
I rename this parameter to figure foo.
And you see,
ChaoDoc is now also getting updated,
since you all have a
helpful representation of
these commands in our AST.
So next thing is what I want
to show is coding assistance.
Of course,
we do all kind of code assist stuff.
Would you just expect today from an IDE?
Let's do a new...
HashMap is good.
So when you do that, you will import.
But we have gone a
little bit beyond that.
Now we also offer what
we call Quick Assist,
which helps you with
tedious coding tasks.
For instance, now I have to type the
object I want to create.
I have to type it, such as do Control-1.
And I can now assign the
statement to a new local variable.
And of course the system will come
in and infer which type this is,
help me with the name.
Well, HashMap is better.
So which type should it have?
Well, that's the clipping
So I want to use a collection, right?
A map.
A map is good.
I don't want to use the concrete type,
I use the map.
But you see, we help you with editing,
we infer, we know your program very well.
In fact, we like Codasys that much that
we have also extended it to
also be part of our dialogues.
So for instance, when you change,
when you have to enter a class name...
We also give you code assist in dialogs,
and I guess it's just a
homogeneous experience.
Once you used to not type anymore,
you really want to have it everywhere.
So this light bulb is the indicator.
And of course,
you will not only do this for classes,
it's also really helpful when
you do regular expressions,
right?
Who knows this index
of regular expressions?
I don't, but of course, we code this,
you can get the same.
So these are some of
the ideas you have here.
- So coding, huh?
So templates is very interesting stuff.
For really boring,
I want to iterate over an array with
with the collection.
Things are linked together.
Actually, can I go back?
Can you ignore what I just did?
I have something cooler for you.
I want to iterate over a
collection because then the
system will have to be smart.
"Ether, ether, so what is it,
an object?" Things like that, right?
You don't have to type it.
The tedious stuff is linked editing.
Very important when you
do test-first development,
XP practices,
you often write code to test first,
and when you write the test first,
you write some method
which doesn't exist yet.
And of course,
you can also get support for creating
this method from unknown references.
And what you see here is a preview.
We always can show you the preview
of what we'll generate for you.
That's also pretty neat technology,
because it requires that we
can do a what-if analysis
of an abstract syntax tree.
So quick assist, there are some fun ones
that I'd like to show you.
For instance,
Some new ones which we have.
Imagine you want to add
a new constructor here.
And the constructor, we are now 3D,
we also have a depth argument.
So I've added the argument
to the constructor,
but of course now I want to
have to assign it to a field.
I have to declare the field,
all the stuff.
So we do this all for you.
You can just control one and say
assign parameter to a new field.
And this will give me the
option to change the name.
The name is OK.
Yeah, and type is OK.
Well, maybe it'll take a long, right?
Things like that.
So really helpful when it
comes to adding new code.
And consistent with that--
One of our nicer quick fixes
is... What is a good example?
I looked up a move
selection is a good one.
So if I add another parameter here-- no,
no, no, no, no.
At the call side, right?
I just see this method.
I change it here at the call side,
take an additional parameter.
The system can help me to suggest
to also change the calling side.
This is really do what I mean, right?
I change the call and Quick Assist,
Quick Fix will help
me to fix up the code.
So I can say, yeah,
I want to actually change the method
to have this additional parameter,
as you see highlighted here.
That's pretty neat.
Poof.
I think poof is the word to say.
Okay, searching quickly.
What's new there is we
search in the background.
We have this new,
nice responsiveness infrastructure.
So what's a good search?
Vector.
Do I have a vector somewhere?
I have to look something which
takes a little bit longer.
Vector.
Here we go.
So vector.
Let's do a references search.
See, that's when I slipped.
I didn't get it.
So I want to reference
this in the workspace.
And now you see I have the option
to run in the background and
then I can continue working.
Wow, it was too fast.
Give me a slow demo machine.
I prepared on my IBM ThinkPad,
so I had plenty of time to talk.
Maybe I have to look for a string.
No strings used.
Oh, silly me.
So I would like to show
you our concurrency story,
but I will do it in another example.
Too fast.
But you see,
you can run in the background.
You can continue working.
And you can group your results
in different presentations,
things like that.
What's also important is
we have opened-up search.
So when you do a Java search,
you can now have the option to plug
in additional sources to be looked up.
So if you have, for instance,
the JSP development,
you can hook into the Java search to say,
when you look for
reference to Java class,
you can also look in your
JSPs and give us the result.
So this is kind of an idea
of opening up that you handle
not but only Java artifacts.
So searching, well call hierarchy is
something new we have.
So who does actually the drawing?
The draw all, draw, okay.
I want to show it.
But what's nice to show the call
hierarchy is because this is something
we wouldn't have done because
I think an over-objection system
call hierarchy is the worst thing to
look at because it's so complicated.
But someone has written a nice call
hierarchy plug-in and in fact it was
so good that we decided to take it.
So that's nice how the
open source stuff works.
Okay.
Now let's move to something
which I think is pretty fun.
Our background is we came from more
-- I want to show you exploration,
how we explore code, how we can navigate
code we don't know yet.
So we come from Smalltalk.
And what we have offered here is
when you come from Smalltalk you
have typically hierarchical browsing.
Do I get some types here?
Yeah.
Right, you do some hierarchical
top-down browsing.
That's cool, but what we found,
what really helps also when you do more
exploratory understanding of a program,
you want to do it way
more editor-centric.
You want to really have
just the editor open,
and everything you want
should be at your fingertips.
Okay, so let's go see and
show you how we do that.
So our new look also helps us with that.
So we can really-- that's how I work.
Everything is the editor.
Everything else is either collapsed
here with our new minimizing
feature and the new look,
or I have fast use on the side.
But my focus is really in the code.
So what's the example
ever I want to go to?
Here I have the... Yeah, that's not bad.
So first of all,
if I want to navigate inside the file,
of course I have this quick navigation.
I can go to get type whatever I want.
If I want to also see the inherited code,
I can just do it twice and then
I get the inherited methods as well.
If I want to understand how
is something overwritten,
I have an in-place type hierarchy.
which shows me what I inherited from,
how is this method overridden.
Of course, you have folding.
Folding we added also for that
because basically what you want
is when you work editor-centric,
you want to often hide Java doc
commands so we can do that out
of the box and you open a file,
we collapse Java documents that
it can really focus on your code.
So we have folding,
we have in-place stuff.
I showed you in the debugger
we do the same thing.
We have in-place diff, basically.
Now when I type here something,
I don't have to go to compare
view to find out what I changed.
If we just show you here this change bar,
Oh well,
that's something I will show you later.
And in a change bar,
I can see what changed and I can
retrieve my stuff if I want to.
I can revert it to what it was before.
So that's the same theme, right?
We want to make
everything editor-centric.
You don't have to do lots of hunting
around to find what's available.
Similarly,
we have these occurrences highlighting,
this mark occurrences feature here,
which basically, behind the scenes,
we know the structure of your program.
So the idea is whenever
you click somewhere,
we can tell you more information about
what you have currently clicked there.
For instance, you click on a parameter,
we show you where is this parameter used.
Where is the result computed?
It gets highlighted immediately.
Or similarly, here is an exception.
Where is this exception thrown?
You just click at it and all the
place where this exception is thrown.
It's highlighted.
Or you go on the return type,
you click on it,
and all the exit points of
the methods are highlighted.
And of course, you go on.
We will go on with that.
Now, you click on an interface and we
will highlight all the methods
implemented in this interface.
Things like that.
You will see it's really point and click.
The other thing is linking.
So if you just want to
see what something is,
you have this link view below.
I click somewhere and immediately
see the declaration of it,
and that's linked.
Again, I don't have to do anything,
I can just by clicking,
I have all the context to do my stuff.
Or if I click on a variable,
I see the declaration, I'm pretty sure.
Right, this guy here.
Yeah, it shows me the declaration.
Same with Javadoc,
if I'm more documentation-oriented.
I will see the Java doc
below as I click around.
Interesting point to mention here,
this is Safari, right?
So we have a native--
that's our widget story.
We natively integrated the platform.
So which means on the Mac,
when you're on the Mac,
we integrate with Safari or the WebKit.
So just if you're overwhelmed
with all this function,
you actually don't need to remember
everything that Eric's saying here.
The tips and tricks section goes through
and enumerates both the new capability
and some of the other existing stuff.
So there's a lot of
things at your fingertips.
Really, navigation at your fingertips.
Now, if you want to go quickly
to another open editor,
it's just one keystroke away, right?
All open editors, Java, Java,
stuff like that.
So you see all this interaction,
code assist-like, filter as you type,
this is used heavily.
So that's, I think, enough for now.
Well, oh no,
I want to show you one thing,
and then I will stop.
How are we doing with the time?
[Transcript missing]
Consistently,
the more validation you do as you type,
the better your code gets.
So we detect some unused code,
new in 3.0, we detect Java doc problems.
So when you have a missing tag,
when you have the wrong tag,
we will flag that.
And the other thing we have added,
we try to help you as much as we can,
so why should we stop checking the code?
We can also help you
checking the commands.
Okay, you see the weekly line here?
So our spell checker has found that
in this comment I have mistyped this.
Control-1 and the same thing,
like Quick Fix cannot only fix Java code,
it can also help you fix your comments.
So I change it back to contents
or add it to my dictionary.
Beyond that, there's JUnit,
there's Ant integration.
Time for some slide break.
It is kind of harsh to only let you
demo that little amount of function
because if you look at the amount of
things that were done in Eclipse 3.0,
there were on the order of,
if you look at the pile of
enhancements and bug fixes,
in the last year 10,000
line items were addressed.
So lots of things.
This gives you a flavor
of the biggest ones,
but lots of stuff occurred.
So let's put JDT in place again.
It's a set of plugins built
on top of the platform.
And what we're going to do now is
look at the plugin architecture
itself a little bit more closely.
So everything in Eclipse is a plugin.
Look at a plugin as a
set of contributions.
You can look at it ranging
from an HTML editor,
set of things,
the Java development tools.
It can be a simple contribution.
It can be just a menu entry with
an action for that menu entry.
So the full range of
things can be contributed.
The plugin defines its implementation,
its prerequisites,
and it has this ability to
define an extension point,
which is a named entity.
So it names a concept that
can be contributed to.
So we've got a very simple story here.
Plugins define extension points.
[Transcript missing]
WWDC ImageView.
So the way it helps you to create stuff,
ImageView,
I want to create the
plugin with the view.
There is some wizard that
helps you to do that,
but it generates very little code,
so as we'll see.
Again,
this is the community helping ourselves
because we're building a lot of plugins.
We need to build tools to make it
easier for us to build plugins.
We've just kind of kept
making this better and better.
So basically this extension
point model is declarative,
which means we declare the
information you need to know about
extension points in an XML file,
which is called the plugin XML.
And we provide you with ways to
edit this in a convenient way.
For instance, here we see the
extensions we define here.
In this case, we'll define one extension,
which is a sample view.
And you see what the extension has to do.
It has a name, it has an icon,
it has a category, why this is needed,
because you want to be able to
present it without having to load
the code that implements the view.
So here you see,
that's how we can present views.
And given the information
we have in the plugin XML,
we can do that without loading code.
So where does the code come in?
There is a class attribute,
and this class attribute
will be responsible to
implement the actual behavior.
Once the user has
activated the contribution,
but not before.
So of course this is linked.
Let's look at this code.
So what, ah,
I haven't told you what I want to build.
So this is a true story.
So we were hacking away,
Kent Beck and I were hacking away,
and he came in one of these Smalltalk,
he had one of these
Smalltalk retro attacks.
You know, we want to find an image,
and he said, see, in Smalltalk I would
have just written a plug,
some code, and would have gotten a view
which shows me all these images.
And of course, well,
we can do the Eclipse as well,
and five minutes later, we had it.
So I replay this experience now for you,
and I hope I don't make a box,
any problems.
So I want to have a table with all
the images that are used in Eclipse.
So it's all the standard images.
So that basically two
things you have to know.
There is a content provider.
This is the guy who defines what
is the data you show in your view.
There is the label provider,
and this is the guy that
knows how to render your data.
Okay, so currently there's just a string,
one, two, three, not very interesting.
So what we want to do is we want
to render here all the images.
So let's go in here.
So you will recognize some of
the stuff I've shown before.
New array, list.
I want to collect all these images.
Of course, I'm lazy.
I don't type this stuff myself.
It's fine.
Well, I'm still polite.
I use a collection.
So then I will iterate over.
I'm going to iterate over the collection.
So again, the flavor here is we've
got the template generated,
the plugin created the view,
and now Erich's just putting
the contents in for this view.
So you have a class,
the shared image class,
that has all these static fields in it.
You're going to collect all their icons.
Yes.
I know I will screw up once, so.
Where did I screw up?
I know where.
[Transcript missing]
Iterate over the array
with a temporary variable.
I know there is a class, Shared Images.
So I go to the class.
I want to get its fields because all
the images are stored in fields there.
Get fields.
"Array type, well,
I'm too tired to type that.
So let me, Eclipse knows that, yes,
a field, that's right.
Okay, here we go,
and then we have to add it,
we have to add it to our list.
What's the guy?
Yeah, sure.
Oh, the array element I want to do, huh?
So, boring, boring.
And we return the stuff.
Return list to...
So let's do some cleanup here.
That's a bad name list.
That's basically fields, right?
Renaming file.
This should be fields.
All right.
Again, we have some code smell here,
the duplication.
Let's just extract this quickly.
What is it?
So let's just extract this quickly.
Extract the method.
So by putting this function
right at your fingertips,
you're naturally inclined to
clean up your code as you go.
You refactor, and you will see.
We manipulate code like plastic.
So you see again, it has this code,
I have a duplicate code fragment.
Of course, this will be fixed as well.
So, okay, now I have to get the image.
So I will just show you the
object to string should do it.
And now this code is almost right.
I want to pass in the name of
the image and it should return
it from me from this call.
But it's too specific, this call.
It has a hard coded parameter.
So let's fix that and
do object to string.
We want to here use another refactoring.
We want to introduce a parameter.
I want to make this method more general,
so I say here just introduce a parameter.
And the parameter is called field name.
Actually I have code assist
as the lamp tells me here,
but it's not very helpful.
Field name.
Okay, so you see what happened is
here an additional parameter
got added and the call,
the parameter,
got also fixed up at the call sign.
So I don't need the
object parameter anymore,
so we do just the other refactoring,
change method signature.
And remove this guy.
OK.
So I think we should be able to run now.
So let's do it in the debugger,
just to be careful.
So we run the workbench on--
did I press the debugger,
John?
JOHN WIGAND: Missed it.
Can't quite focus from here.
I did do it, right?
Did you do a search?
Did I do a search?
I did do it, right?
Did you do a search?
Did I do a search?
Sample, Category, Sample View,
and I will get this nice
table with all the images.
Oops.
Hey, this is beyond pair programming.
We program all together.
Oops.
Hey, this is beyond pair programming.
We program all together.
So we ran out, we got the labels,
but we didn't get the icons themselves.
The name, right?
I have to put the name of the field here.
[Transcript missing]
Did you notice?
So I didn't tweet star, right?
And we chose to do plugin development,
big system,
hot code in place really works.
And it can happen.
Now, depending on the quality of your VM,
I can work for a full day
without having to restart.
It really depends on
the strength of your VM.
I know one VM which is really good that
can almost survive one day of coding.
So that gives you the flavor.
Let's move on to the next part.
But that gives you the flavor,
how easy it is to start in,
build a plugin, and make things happen.
So there's more to the
world than just plug-ins.
There's cases where you want
to be able to attack additional
function onto a plug-in.
So logically,
there's the notion of a plug-in,
but there's fragments where you can
provide platform-specific function,
you can provide translations
or subsets of translations,
and there's cases where you need
to be able to provide auxiliary
function for other means.
So logically,
we think of this as part of the plug-in,
but just to show you, there's more there.
So it's plug-ins plus fragments
equal the logical unit.
So that's basically what
the runtime operates in,
plug-ins and fragments.
Then we have a notion of features,
which is the other way.
This is the deployment unit.
So you deploy sets of
plug-ins and fragments.
This groups them into logical chunks
that make sense at the user level.
So as developers, we build plug-ins.
That's too small of a unit
for giving to our end users.
So we have this notion of
feature for deployment purposes.
Should I quickly do a feature?
Two minutes?
Let's keep moving on this.
We can come back at the end.
My next live I will demo it to you.
So that gives the flavor of how
all our pieces come together.
And just to reiterate,
everything from the bottom
to the top of this picture,
we have the runtime,
everything above that is
constructed out of plugins.
So the kinds of tools that
Eric was showing here,
we can leverage those for building SWT,
Jface, all these pieces and
all the pieces above it.
So transitioning on to what's new in 3.0.
Now Eric leaked a lot of
what's new in 3.0 already.
ERIC GAMMA:
It would have been too boring, right?
It would have been too boring
not to hide this from you.
So I-- JOHN WIANDA:
So we didn't want to hold it.
So we'll give you a flavor
of what happened over the
course of the last year.
We started off listening to what
issues are important to the community.
So back up a year, 15 months,
and the kinds of comments we were
hearing are things like this.
I'm lost in all these contributions.
I love this plug-in story you guys have,
but I've got a lot of plug-ins,
and now there's more function.
I can't navigate my
way through all of it.
So this is really serious,
and we're a tooling platform,
and what we observe,
what we suffer from is the tools are
getting bigger and bigger and bigger.
Once you have thousands of
plug-ins and they all want to
show their stuff in the UI,
you get lost.
Consider a business process modeler.
Since business process modeling
is also plugged into Eclipse,
the business process model
will be exposed to Java.
That's kind of not what they want,
in fact.
It's confusing to them.
So you have to think about how to scale
up to really large-scale applications,
and that's the problem.
So I think that's the problem
that you pointed out to us.
Yeah.
The next one,
Eric's already shown us the fix for,
which is I don't want to be
blocked when I'm doing operation A,
B, or C.
So I'm doing searches,
or I'm doing repository synchronizations,
and I'm stuck waiting all the time.
So this is in the past.
People were stuck waiting,
and they wanted to get that fixed.
- What?
This can't be true.
- A year ago,
this statement was being made.
So people wanted to see more.
We like what we're seeing.
You're on a good path.
We'd like to see more coolness.
We're here to serve.
The third class of feedback
is very interesting.
The community went off and started,
they took Eclipse,
they were using it as their IDE,
and they said, I really like some of the
things I'm seeing here.
So the way the UI presents itself,
this plugin architecture,
this is something I can
leverage in my own applications.
So it's great as a tool,
but I'd actually like to
leverage some of this code as the
basis for my development work.
So the first few things that
happened is people took the plugins,
they threw some away,
they modified a bit of code,
and then they kind of
set this cookbook around.
to other people, say,
here's the kinds of things we
needed to do to make this work.
And we went from that cookbook
into a rich client platform.
So before we look at
the response point here,
this is just to give you the flavor.
There's lots of input and
lots of different ideas.
So we structured these ideas into a
set of themes that we could work on.
And the kinds of themes that we
worked on is mature the platform,
so improve the user experience,
make things more responsive,
one big area.
enhance the Java IDE,
which actually has many facets to it.
Eric,
do you want to talk about the range of
things you had in mind on the platform?
It's not just the
things that Eric demoed.
It's JDT as a platform in
its own right at this point.
Right.
I will catch it later.
Okay.
So you'll come back to that
and then the rich client piece.
So we'll walk through these and we may
or may not intersperse a few demos.
We're actually moving through
the time pretty quickly.
I will make fast demos.
OK, so we'll get some fast demos.
OK, so I'll go very fast in
the description here,
and then we'll get quick demos.
So the problem with large products,
now we have to help the
user find their way into it.
So it's kind of important how
you welcome them to the product.
So we all think if the
platform supports that,
it's even better than just
letting each product invent how
it wants to welcome its users.
So that's why we come with
a standard welcome framework
where others can plug in,
and we support different learning styles.
Demo in two minutes.
Cheat sheets, complex workflows.
Complex products have complex workflows,
like a web service.
No one likes to go through
12 pages of wizards.
That's kind of really modeful.
You want to have a more guided way,
but less modeful way to do complex stuff.
And that's what we use cheat sheets for.
Demo in one minute 30.
And capabilities,
I've already shown you that.
So the demo you have seen for that, no,
I haven't shown that.
The problem is exactly the
business process modeler.
They don't want to see.
They want to see Java.
So they want that
Java gets hidden from them.
Now, but imagine the business process
modeler that learns Java.
How can they discover that
there is also Java in Eclipse?
So capabilities are our means to do that.
Okay, the last one in this improving
the user experience area is
our work on responsiveness.
We've already demoed this as
well with the search facilities.
But basically we're stuck in this modal
world and we got rid of the modality,
number one.
Then number two,
we did such a good job of
getting rid of the modality,
the users didn't realize things
were happening in the background.
So then there was, did I do it?
And then you found the build, build,
build characteristics.
Then we needed to do another
iteration on how the user experience
worked to make sure the user was
in control of what was happening,
they understood how it was working.
I think in fact that at
least four iterations,
right?
So till we got this right,
that we really felt that user in control.
It was really one of the most
challenging things we have.
So can I have the screen please?
Quickly, welcome.
Imagine, I will not do it now,
you just start up your
screen for the first time,
so you get the welcome experience.
The welcome experience is kind of,
you can compute to it,
you can compute documentation
to overview tutorials for the
different learning styles.
Pretty nice eye candy.
Samples, that's interesting.
Those samples get fetched
from an update site,
installed dynamically on your workspace,
so that you can explore them.
Or if you're just bored of the stuff,
you can just go to the workbench.
So that's the welcome.
The nice thing is it's extensible,
you can define and you have a mechanism
to compute this in the platform.
Cheat sheets.
So this is non-modal
multi-step operations.
So let's do a--
Hello World application with G-G.
That's not a typical application.
Consider making a building a web service,
something really complex, multi-step.
So here's my cheat sheet.
Cheat sheets are modeless in a view.
They guide you through stuff.
And they're active.
Some steps, they provide you with actions
that you have to fill in.
When I create a Hello World project,
I have to create my Hello World project.
So hello world, finish.
The nice thing is now
the user is in control.
Hello, source folder, finish.
So you see how this basically works,
right?
You have always access to documentation,
you have active links,
you know where you're done.
If you want,
you can go back and revisit the stuff,
things like that.
What's nice is it's very easy
to build these cheat sheets.
It's really mostly a configuration
task and a coding task.
So basically you describe
in XML what the steps are,
you define the actions
that should be called out,
and off you have your cheat sheet.
Much less programming is involved
in coming up with a wizard,
okay?
What was it?
Capabilities.
Capabilities next.
Again, it's your transition capabilities.
These are all facilities provided
by the platform that plugin
developers can leverage and that
users gain the advantages of.
So capabilities are almost too simple in
Eclipse because Eclipse now has about 60,
70 plugins by now.
A real rich product can go to 100, 500,
1000 plugins, which is 5,000 features.
So in Eclipse,
you basically have grouped the
functionality into capabilities,
development, and team support.
When I don't use CVS,
I don't want to see CVS in the UI at all.
So for instance, plugin development,
I will disable it now because when
I just look at Java development,
I don't want to be bothered
by plugin development.
So I disable it.
And the thing is,
hiding function is easy.
How does the user discover
it once it's hidden?
So for fixing that, we have
I'm going to show you how to use the
plugin project to create a new feature.
The plugin project is a trigger point.
I still see it.
It's intentionally not filtered out.
But when I say next,
the system will remind me, hey,
this is actually a capability
you haven't seen yet.
Do you want me to enable it?
And when you say yes,
then all the contributions
will show up in the UI.
OK, so that's basically how it works.
So the idea is reduce overload of menus,
toolbars in a feature oriented way.
Back to the presentation.
So enhance the JDT we've went
through for the most part.
So I'm going to go through
this pretty quickly,
and you can talk as fast as you want.
And I'm going to keep flicking.
No, I have to stop there.
I haven't stopped there.
Java family, that's another thing.
Once you have done Java,
you notice when you do development today,
you have other artifacts
which refer to Java.
When you do struts development,
you have class names in the
struts description files,
or when you do a web app or a new JSP.
So we have thought we
really have to support that.
So we open up, we allow others to
participate in our stuff.
And see, I heard it that much.
I'm talking to the wrong slide.
Okay, still.
So we have to handle
JSPs and other stuff.
Rich API,
we want to make JDT a richer platform.
If you want to write tools
that manipulate Java source,
we have extended it.
We have added abstract syntax tree APIs,
which not only allow you
to analyze Java code,
but also to modify it.
We have an AST rewriting API.
We make our own function
open that you can extend it.
Quick assist, quick fix,
you can compute to that
by extension points.
And what's very important, and that's,
you see, our design style,
we start pioneering new stuff in JDT,
and over time we push it down
into the language-neutral layer
so that others can also be cool.
So the linking stuff,
you have shown the linked editing,
it was pushed down one layer
below so that other tools,
like the C development tools
that you also have in Eclipse,
can leverage this as well.
Refactoring support, just the same theme,
participation, enhanced JDT,
we have seen that live.
We've seen these as well.
We have seen this.
So we didn't talk about this one yet.
The work for J2SE 1.5 has been ongoing
throughout the 3.0 development cycle.
We decided somewhere in the spring
timeframe that it didn't make sense
to try to release that with 3.0,
but the work's in progress.
You can download it.
We've codenamed the effort Cheetah,
and we're going to be working on
it from when we started early this
year through the summer and fall.
The primary effort so far
has been in the compiler and
extending the compiler region,
but it turns out there's lots
of tooling opportunities here.
This was one week ago.
So one week ago,
most of it was focused on compiler,
but since I've shipped 3.0,
everybody was eager to do new stuff.
So I guess by midnight tonight,
if you go to the update site,
you get not only a core compiler plugin,
but also a UI plugin.
And with this,
you can already browse code
which uses 1.2.5 features,
and I also checked the JCK coverage,
and we are now at 97%.
So it's tremendous progress.
But the nice thing is we leverage
our plugin story to not risk
the main 3.0 stream for now.
But now after 3.0,
we will immediately merge the
streams and work on the 1.5 support.
So we've done this demo already.
So we'll move on to
the rich client piece.
A wide range of comments from
the community on this one.
So the first is,
I've got all these plug-ins
in Eclipse more than I need,
so I'd like to be able to
get rid of some of them.
The second,
although you've given me too much,
some of these are not IDE specific.
So we've kind of talked about
optional plug-ins already so
you can get the flavor of that.
And the third is just the request.
I'd really like to be able
to build my application.
on top of Eclipse.
So what did we do?
I'm just going to give you a little
bit of a philosophy statement here,
and then we'll run a brief demo.
First,
we remember we're a tools platform.
We started off tool-centric.
We didn't want to lose that,
so that's quite important.
However,
some of our decisions were IDE-centric,
so we wanted to remove that
predisposition and move
that to a separate layer.
So we'll have a generic workbench
with a separate layer that has the
IDE specific characteristics in there.
An implementation detail,
we also knew about projects.
We'll projects don't make sense.
That's the wrong data model
for a rich client application,
so we needed to break that linkage.
and then provide optional components.
So that's what we set out to do.
The simple version,
given we have no time anyway,
is we just took the UI plugin,
carved it in half.
So we took it, it was IDE specific,
we made it a generic workbench,
so a generic component,
and then we layered on top of
that the IDE specific stuff.
So my name is there?
Your name's on that one.
So basically what I will show
you is now how you can liposuct
Eclipse to run really simple stuff,
but still having all the Eclipse
plugin infrastructure in your hands.
So I will run this famous HP 35.
HP 35 is a famous calculator.
Mind you, it's kind of a computer museum.
It can even calculate.
Eight, nine, enter, nine plus.
Great.
What you see here,
that's an Eclipse application.
But you see there is
no project management,
there's no build.
It's really liposucted
to vanilla application,
right?
So you have the choice.
You can basically liposuct
it to almost nothing.
And the nice thing about our rich client
platform story is everything is optional.
You want to have help?
Sure.
Install the help plugin.
You want to get some resources support?
Install the resources plugin.
So you can grow and there's a spectrum of
functionality you can get from Eclipse.
But the key point is you
always get the component model,
the plugin model with your application.
Which is, I think,
a really good thing to have.
So the last thing,
I'm not sure whether I'm
navigating really advanced.
What I want to show you
is we have a new runtime.
We have built the runtime in 3.0 on
top of a standard component model,
OSGI.
And the idea was for 3.0,
we want to have dynamic plugins,
which means plugins which
can dynamically come and go.
And I will show you that.
So first, let's look at the plugins
which we currently have.
Okay, we see we have 15 plugins
now installed in OSGI.
This is called a bundle.
And I will now go in and install another
one and then see what happens in the UI.
So I need to file one.
So one of the characteristics
we got when we moved to OSGI is
the ability to dynamically add
plug-ins and technically we're able
to remove plug-ins from the system.
So what Eric's doing
now is he's going in,
pointing to an area in the file
system saying there's a plug-in here,
let's install it please.
So if he can type the path correctly.
Bundle ID 16.
Now we start it.
And you have to watch over here.
So basically I have done a
plug-in which extends the
calculator to the new operator.
So I start 16.
Boof.
Okay, dynamically the plugin gets loaded.
Well, we always load plugins dynamically,
but we now have mechanisms to
also update the presentation,
the UI of your plugins dynamically.
And if John lets me,
I even calculated it once.
Yes, you're right.
Multiply with zero.
Okay.
You should have stopped me.
Very good.
Let's go back to the slides.
So a reminder,
Eclipse 3.0 available today.
Turns out the final bytes went up
on Friday and they're available
for everyone to put to use.